\documentclass[]{elsarticle} %review=doublespace preprint=single 5p=2 column
%%% Begin My package additions %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\usepackage[hyphens]{url}

  \journal{An awesome journal} % Sets Journal name


\usepackage{lineno} % add
\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}

\usepackage{graphicx}
\usepackage{booktabs} % book-quality tables
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%% end my additions to header

\usepackage[T1]{fontenc}
\usepackage{lmodern}
\usepackage{amssymb,amsmath}
\usepackage{ifxetex,ifluatex}
\usepackage{fixltx2e} % provides \textsubscript
% use upquote if available, for straight quotes in verbatim environments
\IfFileExists{upquote.sty}{\usepackage{upquote}}{}
\ifnum 0\ifxetex 1\fi\ifluatex 1\fi=0 % if pdftex
  \usepackage[utf8]{inputenc}
\else % if luatex or xelatex
  \usepackage{fontspec}
  \ifxetex
    \usepackage{xltxtra,xunicode}
  \fi
  \defaultfontfeatures{Mapping=tex-text,Scale=MatchLowercase}
  \newcommand{\euro}{€}
\fi
% use microtype if available
\IfFileExists{microtype.sty}{\usepackage{microtype}}{}
\bibliographystyle{elsarticle-harv}
\ifxetex
  \usepackage[setpagesize=false, % page size defined by xetex
              unicode=false, % unicode breaks when used with xetex
              xetex]{hyperref}
\else
  \usepackage[unicode=true]{hyperref}
\fi
\hypersetup{breaklinks=true,
            bookmarks=true,
            pdfauthor={},
            pdftitle={A comparison of model-based and design-based approaches for spatial data.},
            colorlinks=false,
            urlcolor=blue,
            linkcolor=magenta,
            pdfborder={0 0 0}}
\urlstyle{same}  % don't use monospace font for urls

\setcounter{secnumdepth}{5}
% Pandoc toggle for numbering sections (defaults to be off)

% Pandoc citation processing

% Pandoc header

\usepackage{bm} \usepackage{bbm} \usepackage{color} \DeclareMathOperator{\var}{{var}} \DeclareMathOperator{\cov}{{cov}}

\begin{document}
\begin{frontmatter}

  \title{A comparison of model-based and design-based approaches for spatial
data.}
    \author[USEPA]{Michael Dumelle\corref{1}}
   \ead{Dumelle.Michael@epa.gov} 
    \author[STLAW]{Matthew Higham\corref{1}}
   \ead{mhigham@stlaw.edu} 
    \author[OSU]{Lisa Madsen}
  
    \author[USEPA]{Anthony R. Olsen}
  
    \author[NOAA]{Jay M. Ver Hoef}
  
      \address[USEPA]{United States Environmental Protection Agency, 200 SW 35th St,
Corvallis, Oregon, 97333}
    \address[STLAW]{Saint Lawrence University Department of Math, Computer Science, and
Statistics, 23 Romoda Drive, Canton, New York, 13617}
    \address[OSU]{Oregon State University Department of Statistics, 239 Weniger Hall,
Corvallis, Oregon, 97331}
    \address[NOAA]{Marine Mammal Laboratory, Alaska Fisheries Science Center, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Seattle, Washington, 98115}
      \cortext[1]{Corresponding Author}
  
  \begin{abstract}
  This is the abstract.
  
  It consists of two paragraphs.
  \end{abstract}
  
 \end{frontmatter}

\emph{Text based on elsarticle sample manuscript, see
\url{http://www.elsevier.com/author-schemas/latex-instructions\#elsarticle}}

\hypertarget{introduction}{%
\section{Introduction}\label{introduction}}

Please leave comments in your
\textcolor{blue}{c}\textcolor{magenta}{o}\textcolor{green}{l}\textcolor{red}{o}\textcolor{cyan}{r}:
\textcolor{blue}{Michael}, \textcolor{magenta}{Matt},
\textcolor{green}{Lisa}, \textcolor{red}{Tony}, \textcolor{cyan}{Jay}.

Several comparisons between model-based and design-based for spatial
data have been considered, but they tend to compare spatial models to
IRS or SIRS (stratified IRS). No comparison has been made between
spatial models and spatially balanced design-based approaches.

\hypertarget{background}{%
\section{Background}\label{background}}

\hypertarget{design-based-philosphy}{%
\subsection{Design-Based Philosphy}\label{design-based-philosphy}}

Design-Based Overview

Design-based inference uses characteristics of the sampling design to to
estimate parameters of interest Typically, there are few assumptions
involved because intervals are derived using the sampling design
itself\ldots\ldots\ldots..

\hypertarget{model-based-philosphy}{%
\subsection{Model-Based Philosphy}\label{model-based-philosphy}}

Model-Based Overview

On the other hand, model-based inference imposes additional assumptions
on the data with a potential to provide more precise estimates if the
additional assumptions hold. Instead of estimating true but unknown
parameters, the goal of model-based inference in the spatial context is
often \emph{prediction} of an unknown quantity. This is a fundamental
philosophical difference between sampling-based and model-based
approaches. Instead of \emph{estimating} a fixed unknown mean, we are
\emph{predicting} the value of the mean, a random variable. We know that
if we sampled all sites, we would have an exact prediction for the mean
of our one realized spatial surface, without any uncertainty. But, the
true mean of the spatial process that generated our realized data is
still not known, and, in the prediction context, we typically do not
care much about what value the mean of the underlying process takes.

Figure 1a. Data is fixed. In a finite population example, show a 3d
surface that can be generated by anything. If we repeatedly sample the
surface, then 95\% of all 95\% CIs will contain the true mean, which
never changes.

Figure 1b. Spatial process is fixed. In a finite population example,
show 10 3d surfaces that are generated from some model. If we repeatedly
generate the surface and obtain a sample, then 95\% of all 95\% PIs will
contain the realized means. The realized mean changes from surface to
surface and it's not necessarily the case that 95\% of all 95\% PIs will
contain the true, underlying mean.

\hypertarget{comparing-design-based-vs.-model-based}{%
\subsection{Comparing Design-Based
vs.~Model-Based}\label{comparing-design-based-vs.-model-based}}

Design-Based and Model-Based Comparisons

There have been many comparisons between the two paradigms\ldots\ldots.

\hypertarget{spatially-balanced-design-and-analysis}{%
\subsection{Spatially Balanced Design and
Analysis}\label{spatially-balanced-design-and-analysis}}

Spatially balanced sampling algorithms use spatial information to obtain
samples spread out in space. Spatially balanced samples are useful
because they tend to yield estimators that are more precise than
estimators constructed from an sampling algorithm that is not spatially
balanced (Barabesi and Franceschi, 2011; Benedetti et al., 2017;
Grafström and Lundström, 2013; Robertson et al., 2013; Stevens Jr and
Olsen, 2004; Wang et al., 2013). To quantify spatial balance, Stevens Jr
and Olsen (2004) proposed statistics based on Voroni polygons. Many
spatially balanced sampling algorithms exist, including the Generalized
Random Tessellation Stratified (Stevens Jr and Olsen, 2004), the Local
Pivotal Method (Grafström et al., 2012; Grafström and Matei, 2018),
Spatially Correlated Poisson Sampling (Grafström, 2012), Balanced
Acceptance Sampling (Robertson et al., 2013), Within-Sample-Distance
(Benedetti and Piersimoni, 2017), and Halton Iterative Partitioning
(Robertson et al., 2018) algorithms. Here we focus on the Generalized
Random Tessellation Stratified (GRTS) algorithm, which has several
attractive properties that we discuss next.

The GRTS algorithm is used to sample from finite and infinite sample
frames. A finite sample frames contains a finite number of sampling
units and is related to a point geometry. An infinite sample frame
contains an infinite number of sampling units and is related to linear
and polygon geometries. Examples of point, linear, and polygon resources
include lake centroids, stream networks, and wetland areas,
respectively. In addition to its applicability for finite and infinite
sample frames, the GRTS algorithm naturally accommodates stratified
designs and designs with unequal selection probabilities. The algorithm
has also been used to select replacement sites using reverse
hierarchical ordering (Stevens Jr and Olsen, 2004). Replacement sites
are used to replace sites in the original sample that cannot be sampled,
often as a result of physical difficulty in reaching the site or
landowner denial of access to the sites. More recently, the GRTS
algorithm also accommodates legacy (historical) sites, minimum distance
between sites, and nearest neighbor replacement sites. The GRTS
algorithm is implemented in the \textbf{\textsf{R}} package
\texttt{spsurvey} (Dumelle et al., 2021).

The GRTS algorithm works by mapping two-dimensional space into
one-dimensional space while incorporating some elements of randomness.
First a square bounding box is placed over the sample frame and divided
into four equally sized squares randomly given an level-one address of
0, 1, 2, or 3. Then the inclusion probabilities of the sampling units in
each square are summed. If this sum is at least one in any of the cells,
a set of four sub-squares are placed within each square. Each set of
four sub-squares are randomly given a second address (a level-two
address) of 0, 1, 2, 3. Then the inclusion probabilities in each
sub-square are summed, and if any of these sums are at least one, a
third level of squares are added in the same manner. This hierarchical
addressing continues until the inclusion probabilities in the smallest
squares are all less than 1. The squares are then mapped to the
one-dimensional line in order of their addresses. The length of this
line equals \(n\), the desired sample size (the sum of the inclusion
probabilities). A uniform random variable, denoted by \(u_1\) is
simulated in \([0, 1]\) and placed on this line. The location of \(u_1\)
on the line can be linked to a sampling unit, denoted by \(s_1\). Then
\(u_2 \equiv u_1 + 1\), which can be linked to another sampling unit,
denoted by \(s_2\). Because the GRTS algorithm requires the inclusion
probabilities of the smallest sub-cells to be less than one, \(s_1\) and
\(s_2\) must be distinct. This process continues until the \(n\)
sampling units have been selected as part of the sample. Further details
are provided by (Stevens Jr and Olsen, 2004) and (Dumelle et al., 2021).

The Horvitz-Thompson estimator (Horvitz and Thompson, 1952) and its
continuous analog (Cordy, 1993) yield unbiased estimates of population
totals (and means). If \(\tau\) is a population total, then the
Horvitz-Thompson estimator of \(\tau\), denoted by \(\hat{\tau}_{HT}\),
is given by \begin{align}\label{eq:htest}
  \hat{\tau}_{HT} = \sum_{i = 1}^n Y_i \pi_i^{-1},
\end{align} where \(Y_i\) is the observed value of the \(i\)th sampling
unit, and \(\pi_i\) is the inclusion probability of the \(i\)th sampling
unit. Estimating the variance of \(\hat{\tau}_{HT}\) directly relies on
knowing the probability that \(s_i\) and \(s_j\) are both included in
the sample (second-order inclusion probability), which can be unfeasible
to compute. Furthermore, this variance estimator does incorporate
spatial locations. To address these challenges, (Stevens Jr and Olsen,
2003) proposed an alternative variance estimator: the local neighborhood
variance estimator. The local neighborhood variance estimator does not
require second-order inclusion probabilities. It also incorporates
spatial locations, which tends to reduce the estimated variance of
compared \(\hat{\tau}_{HT}\) to a variance estimator ignoring spatial
location (Stevens Jr and Olsen, 2003).

\hypertarget{finite-population-block-kriging}{%
\subsection{Finite Population Block
Kriging}\label{finite-population-block-kriging}}

Finite Population Block Kriging (FPBK) is an alternative to
samipling-based methods (Ver Hoef, 2008). FPBK expands the
geostatistical kriging framework to the finite population setting.
Instead of basing inference off of a specific sampling design, we assume
the data were generated by a spatial process with parameters that can be
estimated using the framework of a model.

Ver Hoef (2008) gives details on the theory of FPBK, but some of the
basic principles are summarized below. For a response variable
\(\mathbf{z}\) that can be measured on a finite number of \(N\) sites,
we want to predict some linear function of the response variable,
\(\tau(\mathbf{z}) = \mathbf{b}^\prime \mathbf{z}\), where
\(\mathbf{b}\) is a vector of weights. For example, if we want to
predict the total abundance across all sites, then we would use a vector
of 1's for the weights.

Typically, however, we only have a sample of the \(N\) sites. Denoting
quantities that are part of the sampled sites with a subscript \emph{s}
and quantities that are part of the unsampled sites with a subscript
\emph{u},

\begin{equation}
\begin{pmatrix} \label{equation:Zmarginal}
    \mathbf{z}_s      \\
    \mathbf{z}_u
\end{pmatrix}
=
\begin{pmatrix}
  \mathbf{X}_s    \\
  \mathbf{X}_u
\end{pmatrix}
\bm{\beta} +
\begin{pmatrix}
\bm{\delta}_s    \\
\bm{\delta}_u
\end{pmatrix},
\end{equation} where \(\mathbf{X}_s\) and \(\mathbf{X}_u\) are the
design matrices for the sampled and unsampled sites, respectively, and
\(\bm{\delta}_s\) and \(\bm{\delta}_u\) are random errors for the
sampled and unsampled sites. Denoting
\(\bm{\delta} \equiv [\bm{\delta}_s \,\, \bm{\delta}_u]'\), we assume
that \(E(\bm{\delta})\) = \(\mathbf{0}\).

We also typically assume that there is spatial correlation in
\(\bm{\delta}\), which can be modeled using a covariance function. Many
common choices for this function assume that spatial covariance
decreases with increasing Euclidean distance between sites. The primary
function used throughout the simulations and applications of this
manuscript is the Exponential covariance function: the \(i,j^{th}\)
entry for \(\mathop{\mathrm{{var}}}(\bm{\delta})\) is \mbox{}
\begin{align}\label{equation:expcov}
\mathop{\mathrm{{cov}}}(\delta_i, \delta_j) = \theta_3 + \theta_1\exp(-h_{i,j}/\theta_2), \\
\textcolor{blue}{\sigma^2[(1 - v)\exp(-3\mathbf{h}_{i,j}/\phi) + v\mathbbm{1}\{\mathbf{h}_{i,j} = 0\}]}, 
\end{align} where \(h_{i,j}\) is the distance between sites \(i\) and
\(j\), and \(\bm{\theta}\) is a vector of spatial covariance parameters
of the partial sill \(\theta_1\), the range \(\theta_2\), and the nugget
\(\theta_3\). However, any spatial covariance function could be used in
the place of the Exponential, including functions that allow for
anisotropy {[}pg. 80 - 93{]}(Chiles and Delfiner, 1999).

With the above model formulation, the Best Linear Unbiased Predictor
(BLUP) for \(\tau(\mathbf{b}'\mathbf{z})\)
\textcolor{blue}{Did you mean to give the form of the BLUP here? $\tau(\mathbf{b}'\mathbf{z})$ is vague}
and its prediction variance can be computed. While details of the
derivation are in (Ver Hoef, 2008), we note here that the predictor and
its variance are both moment-based. Neither require a particular
distribution for \(\mathbf{z}\).

\hypertarget{numerical-study}{%
\section{Numerical Study}\label{numerical-study}}

\hypertarget{software}{%
\subsection{Software}\label{software}}

FPBK can be readily performed in \texttt{R} with the \texttt{sptotal}
package (Higham et al., 2020). We use \texttt{sptotal} for both the
simulation analysis and the application, estimating parameters with
Restricted Maximum Likelihood (REML).

\hypertarget{discussion}{%
\section{Discussion}\label{discussion}}

\hypertarget{references}{%
\section*{References}\label{references}}
\addcontentsline{toc}{section}{References}

\hypertarget{refs}{}
\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-barabesi2011sampling}{}%
Barabesi, L., Franceschi, S., 2011. Sampling properties of spatial total
estimators under tessellation stratified designs. Environmetrics 22,
271--278.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-benedetti2017spatially}{}%
Benedetti, R., Piersimoni, F., 2017. A spatially balanced design with
probability function proportional to the within sample distance.
Biometrical Journal 59, 1067--1084.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-benedetti2017spatiallyreview}{}%
Benedetti, R., Piersimoni, F., Postiglione, P., 2017. Spatially balanced
sampling: A review and a reappraisal. International Statistical Review
85, 439--454.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-chiles1999geostatistics}{}%
Chiles, J.-P., Delfiner, P., 1999. Geostatistics: Modeling Spatial
Uncertainty. John Wiley \& Sons, New York.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-cordy1993extension}{}%
Cordy, C.B., 1993. An extension of the horvitz---thompson theorem to
point sampling from a continuous universe. Statistics \& Probability
Letters 18, 353--362.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-dumelle2021spsurvey}{}%
Dumelle, M., Olsen, A.R., Kincaid, T., Weber, M., 2021. Selecting and
analyzing spatial probability samples in r using spsurvey. Manuscript
Submitted for Publication.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-grafstrom2012spatiallypoisson}{}%
Grafström, A., 2012. Spatially correlated poisson sampling. Journal of
Statistical Planning and Inference 142, 139--147.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-grafstrom2013well}{}%
Grafström, A., Lundström, N.L., 2013. Why well spread probability
samples are balanced. Open Journal of Statistics 3, 36--41.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-grafstrom2012spatially}{}%
Grafström, A., Lundström, N.L., Schelin, L., 2012. Spatially balanced
sampling through the pivotal method. Biometrics 68, 514--520.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-grafstrom2018spatially}{}%
Grafström, A., Matei, A., 2018. Spatially balanced sampling of
continuous populations. Scandinavian Journal of Statistics 45, 792--805.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-higham2020sptotal}{}%
Higham, M., Ver Hoef, J., Bryce, F., 2020. Sptotal: Predicting totals
and weighted sums from spatial data.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-horvitz1952generalization}{}%
Horvitz, D.G., Thompson, D.J., 1952. A generalization of sampling
without replacement from a finite universe. Journal of the American
statistical Association 47, 663--685.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-robertson2013bas}{}%
Robertson, B., Brown, J., McDonald, T., Jaksons, P., 2013. BAS: Balanced
acceptance sampling of natural resources. Biometrics 69, 776--784.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-robertson2018halton}{}%
Robertson, B., McDonald, T., Price, C., Brown, J., 2018. Halton
iterative partitioning: Spatially balanced sampling via partitioning.
Environmental and Ecological Statistics 25, 305--323.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-stevens2003variance}{}%
Stevens Jr, D.L., Olsen, A.R., 2003. Variance estimation for spatially
balanced samples of environmental resources. Environmetrics 14,
593--610.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-stevens2004spatially}{}%
Stevens Jr, D.L., Olsen, A.R., 2004. Spatially balanced sampling of
natural resources. Journal of the american Statistical association 99,
262--278.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-verhoef2008spatial}{}%
Ver Hoef, J.M., 2008. Spatial methods for plot-based sampling of
wildlife populations. Environmental and Ecological Statistics 15, 3--13.

\leavevmode\hypertarget{ref-wang2013design}{}%
Wang, J.-F., Jiang, C.-S., Hu, M.-G., Cao, Z.-D., Guo, Y.-S., Li, L.-F.,
Liu, T.-J., Meng, B., 2013. Design-based spatial sampling: Theory and
implementation. Environmental modelling \& software 40, 280--288.


\end{document}


